Journal for converting the Orient Express text game from BASIC to Python.

Paul Pham [2013-10-27]

I wanted to translate an old BASIC program "The Orient Express" by David Ahl
in 1986.
I remember checking out a book from the library with the source code listings
of a
bunch of old text adventure games, including Oregon Trail. That's how you had
to
enter BASIC programs back then, type them in by hand, or download from a disk or a
bulletin board service (dialing in by modem), from someone who *had* typed it in by
hand, maybe even the original author. Sometimes the programs were even free, but you
were paying for the service of not having to type in your own programs.

Okay, enough digression. I google online for "orient express basic text game" and get
it on the first hit, despite the word "basic" being a common English word.

	http://jbfilesarchive.com/phpBB3/viewtopic.php?f=4&t=821

Line numbers 100 through 3330! Ah, programs with enforced line numbers again,
in multiples of 10 so that you can go back and insert more lines if you make
mistakes.
But in Sublime, I can see that it takes 325 lines, so some of the lines got
skipped or removed.

	100 CLS : KEY OFF : ON ERROR GOTO 3160

The first line of the screen is CLS, which I remember means
"clear the screen." I don't know how to do that in Python, but in Linux/Mac it's
just the "clear" command, and on Windows it's "cls". So I google for the answer and
get the following answer on StackOverflow (as usual):

	http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2084508/clear-terminal-in-python

Then I pause to create a StackExchange account (the parent company for StackOverflow)
so I can upvote the answer as helpful (it was at 50, I'm gonna bump it up to 51).
Hmm, I need 15 reputation to upvote. I dunno how to that, I'm leaving it for now.

I know I have to import the os module to execute operating system specific commands,
on the terminal / command-line. But then I forget what the function is called in
the module os, and I feel dumb, so I switch back to the browser window with the
StackOverflow answer to check again: it's called 'system'.
It also uses this cool one-line syntax for if-else, which I used to know but forgot.

os.system('cls' if os.name=='nt' else 'clear')

The 'nt' is because all recent Windows versions are based on Windows NT.

It's not obvious at all that you can do this with if-else
if you don't already know it.
This makes me empathize with my students more, especially those learning
programming for the first time.

Anyway, all this to clear the screen. The rest of the line is for
error-handling,
which I'm gonna skip.

Let's move on to printing the title.

	110 LOCATE 10, 27 : PRINT "The Orient Express, 1923"

Aagh, this requires more terminal trickery. I need to center the text on my
newly centered screen. More googling/ stackoverflowing. But first I save the
file as "orient.py". Now it's official, we're doing this!

From a query of "python terminal position text" it looks like we can only
do text positioning in Windows. So I'm not gonna be a perferctionist
(about this one thing, haha) and move on.

Also, I just enabled the page ruler in sublime so that I don't go past the
78 column mark. A bunch of earlier lines are too long, and I don't know how
to re-paragraphy the text. I don't even know what that feature is called.
I used to know, on emacs, oh well. I was gonna go get my paper journal and
write down that one of the uses of a teacher is, "What do I call this thing
which has this or looks like that or lets you do this other thing". Because
that's something you just know because someone else told you, or you looked
around or stumbled upon by accident. But in this case, I don't know what that
feature is called, so I need my own teacher. Sometimes the teacher doesn't
know. If only there were a recursive call of teachers, where I could call
my old programming teachers, and they could call theirs, until finally we
reached some great master Ur-Programmer, probably Richard Stallman, who
is guaranteed to know all the answers, because they invented it in the first
place.

Aside: "theme: credentials". How do you know I am who I say I am anyway?
Why should you listen to me about programming? What have I done that's so
great anyway? Anyway...

I just printed the title and old copyright message on the terminal, and added
my own. There is a 27 year difference between my copyright message and
David Ahl's. Maybe one of my students someday will retype and re-translate
my translation. Stranger things have happened. I probably could not have
predicted that I would be teaching programming someday.

120 LOCATE 13, 28 : PRINT "(c) David H. Ahl, 1986" : LOCATE 23, 27
130 PRINT "Press any key to continue." : RN = -32768!
140 WHILE LEN(INKEY$) = 0 : RN = RN + 1 : WEND
150 WHILE RN > 32767 : RN = RN - 65535! : WEND : RANDOMIZE RN : CLS

Whoa, there is some clever stuff going on here.
First, I need to look up how to wait for input. But in fact, here is our
first variable RN, and he is using it to seed a random number generator.
Actually, a pseudo-random number generator (PRNG),
which is why it needs a seed.
In every modern language, a linear congruence generator is used seeded off
the current date and time, but here he is basing it off how long the user
waits before pressing enter. So there is a direct, but still somewhat
karmic or mystical connection, between the later game randomness and the
user's reading speed or reflexes or what have you. I like it, but I'm not
going to replicate it right now.

I do add "import random" to the top of my program.

PRINT TAB(22) "The Mysterious Arms Deal" : PRINT : GOSUB 1710
170 '
180 'Initialization
190 DIM C$(25), CN(25), CP(25), DA(25), HZ(25), LA$(25), LB$(25), ME(25), N$(25)
200 DIM TA(25), TD(25), CS(25), MB$(15), MD$(26)
210 GOSUB 1880 : 'Read data about journey segments
220 GOSUB 2160 : 'Read statements of travelers
230 GOSUB 2430 : 'Read names of those on the train
240 GOSUB 2530 : 'Read menu selections
250 GOSUB 2760 : 'Shuffle 24 integers for later use
260 PRINT "Press any key to call a taxi…" : WHILE LEN(INKEY$) = 0 : WEND
270 

Oo, an episode name, or a chapter name. "The Mysterious Arms Dealer."
And I remember vaguely that to begin a comment in BASIC you use a single
quote mark? And everything else on the line is apparently a comment, until
you type a newline. Man, if I had to teach programming again from scratch,
I would begin much more simply.

Now I will just duplicate a bunch of global variables with the same names,
and later when I find out what they are for, I can just search and replace.
Likewise, I will create functions to do all the initializations, but I
will give them better names than "GOSUB xxx".

I had to look up how to read in input on StackOverflow:

http://stackoverflow.com/questions/5404068/how-to-read-keyboard-input

Apparently raw_input is the preferred way in Python 2, and I've seen it in
some of my students programs.

Google: "How to create a list of zeros in Python?"
Found: http://stackoverflow.com/questions/8528178/list-of-zeros-in-python
Whoa, this addition/multiplication metaphor applies to lists too!

What does this dollar sign $ notation mean in BASIC? I think it means string?
Anyway, I don't really need to initialize strings in Python.

I created a new module called 'orient_data.py', which is where I'll store
the initialization subroutines. First with GOSUB 1880, which I call
read_journey_segments().

1880 'Subroutine to read meals, conversations, hazards, day, times, location
1890 FOR I = 1 TO 24 : READ X, ME(I), CN(I), HZ(I), DA(I), TA(I), TD(I), LA$(I), LB$(I)
1900 NEXT I : RETURN
1910 DATA 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1430, "London", "England"
...

Oh, I guess I should move the variables into the orient_data module and
modify them with a global statement as well.
